revised lesson design as suggested by Lesson Development Study Group (#60)
carpentries-incubator/deep-learning-intro: _extras/design.md

- **Python** – Previous Experience programming in python is required (Refer to Python Data Carpentry Lesson )
- **Pandas** – Knowledge of the Pandas python package
- **Basic Machine Learning Knowledge** – Data Cleaning, Train & Test Split, Overfitting & Underfitting, Metrics (Accuracy, Recall, etc.),

## Learning objectives

> ## Overview
> After following this lesson, learners will be able to:
>  
> - Prepare input data for use for deep learning 
> - Design and train a Deep Neural Network
> - Troubleshoot the learning process
> - Measure the performance of the network
> - Visualizing Data and Results
> - Re-use existing network architectures with and without pre-trained weights
> 
{: .objectives }

The following offers more details to each learning objective based on Bloom's Taxonomy. For hints on how to use this approach, see [lesson 15 of the instructor training](https://carpentries.github.io/instructor-training/15-lesson-study/index.html)

### Prepare input data for use for deep learning 

This includes cleaning data, filling missing values, normalizing, and transforming categorical columns into dummy encoding.

After this module, learners can ...

> - define a checklist how to analyze the raw data considering an application of ML

Author: With this, I wanted to say: Learners can take pen and paper and outline a checklist what aspects of the data they would check BEFORE data is handed to a learning algorithm of any kind. For example, I'd check scales of variables, histograms of important features, ...

> - define a checklist how to analyze the raw data considering an application of ML

Author: @dafnevk let me know if any rewording is required. Otherwise, I'll resolve this comment.

> - define a checklist how to analyze the raw data considering an application of ML

Reviewer: Ok that is useful indeed, maybe reword it as follows:
```suggestion
- define a checklist for data analysis steps before applying Deep Learning to the data
```

- describe criteria by which to judge good or bad data, e.g. how a column's values should be distributed
- execute a min-max normalization on floating point data
- sketch how to insert missing timestamps or literal values (i.e. factors or non-numeric entries)
- implement a transformation of categorical values into a numerical encoding (`int8`)
- argue for or against strategies to to normalize data

> - formulate techniques beyond transformations to clean data (exploit correlations, create summary statistics, ...)

Author: OK, I paraphrased this from the minimal learning goals that were there before. I am fine with leaving things out. When thinking about deep learning (or CNNs) for image data, there are mostly 2 operations that I consider essential: 
- min-max scaling of pixel intensities
- cropping/padding images to a consistent size

> - formulate techniques beyond transformations to clean data (exploit correlations, create summary statistics, ...)

Author: Let me know which items you think can stay or should be added.

> - formulate techniques beyond transformations to clean data (exploit correlations, create summary statistics, ...)

Reviewer 2: Could we reword this to make clearer what is meant, e.g. 'techniques to prepare (cleaned) data for training a deep learning network` or similar?

Because I agree that there are some preparation steps (as the 2 mentioned by Peter above) that are rather specific for DL. The re-scaling is also relevant for any feature, not only pixel intensities.

> - formulate techniques beyond transformations to clean data (exploit correlations, create summary statistics, ...)

Author: I see multiple ways of going forward with this. I'd love to remain within Bloom's taxonomy though as this helped me tremendously. I don't know if @dafnevk suggested to remove specific points from the list above. I assume your comment focused on `-  formulate techniques beyond transformations ...`, right?

How about this then:
```suggestion
- formulate techniques to prepare data for training a deep learning network (homogenous use of encodings, summary statistics to check if they appear consistent, min/max values,  ...)
```

> - formulate techniques beyond transformations to clean data (exploit correlations, create summary statistics, ...)

Reviewer: Much better and specific, although now it overlaps a bit with the learning goals above it. And I don't fully understand what you mean with 'to check if they appear consistent'.
Would it make sense to put it as the first learning goal in this category:
```suggestion
- formulate techniques to prepare (clean) data for training a deep learning network
```
And then specifying the techiniques further in the separate learning goals as you wrote them down already (execute min-max normalization, etc).

> - formulate techniques beyond transformations to clean data (exploit correlations, create summary statistics, ...)

Author: sounds good.

### Design and train a Deep Neural Network

This includes knowledge of when to different types of layers

After this module, learners can ...

- list/repeat the three ingrediants to a feed forward network: input, hidden layers, output

> - classify parts of a feed forward network

Author: When I present a network architecture of a feed forward network to my learner, say like the output of `keras.model.summary()`, she can tell me what the acronyms stand for and what they do.

> - classify parts of a feed forward network

Author: I updated this with 67d4065

- describe a fully connected (dense) layer
- describe a convolutional layer
- describe a max pooling layer
- describe an activation function
- describe a softmax layer
- argue against abundant use of the sigmoid function (exploding/vanishing gradients)

> - select the output data shape from a convolutional layer

Author: Well spotted. I meant calculate. Fixed with bb37279

- interpret errors with convolutional layers
- execute a 3 layer network on the MNIST data (or similar)
- differentiate a dense layer and a convolutional layer
- experiment with values of dense layer and a convolutional layer
- select a layer type depending on the input data
- develop a 5 layer network that comprises both layer types

### Troubleshoot the learning process

> Often when designing neural networks training will not automatically work very well. This requires setting the parameters of the training algorithm correctly, modifying the design of the network or changing the data pre-processing

Author: fixed with f5f5040

- state that cross-validation is used in Deep Learning too
- describe how to split a dataset into training/test/validation set
- describe how Drop-Out Layers work
- execute a plot to draw the loss per epoch for training and test set
- compare values of precision and recall
- differentiate a overfitting network from a well-behaved network
- detect a underfitting network
- critique a provided network design

### Visualizing Data and Results

Within each episode how to visualize data and results

After this module, learners can ...

- identify important plots to create at the end of training (provide selected samples and their prediction)
- execute plotting of important variables during training (loss, ROC)
- use tensorboard and related callbacks during training 
- examine the results of a partners network
- critique the results of a partners network

### Re-use existing network architectures with and without pre-trained weights

Re-use of architectures is common in deep learning. Especially when using pre-trained weights (transfer-learning) it can also be very powerful.

After this module, learners can ...

- describe what transfer learning stands for

> - explain the expected relation of data sets (one used for the network originally and one for the network at hand)

Reviewer: maybe word it slightly different:
explain in what situations transfer learning is beneficial.

Author: fixed with d5fe467

#### Eric from Pediatrics Science

Eric ran a large array of clinical trials in his hospital to improve children pharmaceutics for treating a common (non-lethal) virus. He obtained a table that lists the progression of the treatment for each patient, the dose of the drug given, whether the patient was in the placebo group or not, etc. As the table has more than 100 000 rows, Eric is certain that he can use ML to cluster the rows in one column where the data taking was inconsistent. Eric has touched coding here and there where necessary, but never saw it necessary to learn coding. His cheatsheet is his core wisdom with code. So his supervisor invited him to take a course on ML as "this is the tech of these days!" as his boss said.

### Notes

- Probably have overhyped expectations of deep learning. 
- They don’t know if it’s the right tool for their situations. 
- They have no idea what it takes to actually do deep learning.
- Want to quickly have some useful skills for their own data.

#### Required Pre-Knowledge

> - **Python** – Previous Experience programming in python is required (Refer to Python Data Carpentry Lesson )
> - **Pandas** – Knowledge of the Pandas python package
> - **Basic Machine Learning Knowledge** – Data Cleaning, Train & Test Split, Overfitting & Underfitting, Metrics (Accuracy, Recall, etc.),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Python** – Previous programming experience in Python is required (Refer to Python Data Carpentry Lesson)
- **Pandas** – Knowledge of the Pandas Python package
- **Basic Machine Learning Knowledge** – Data cleaning, train & test split, overfitting & underfitting, metrics (accuracy, recall, etc.),
```

Reviewer 2: only nitty-gritty stuff, trying to make it more consistent (feel free to change/ignore).

## Learning objectives

> ## Overview
> After following this lesson, learners will be able to:
>  
> - Prepare input data for use for deep learning 
> - Design and train a Deep Neural Network
> - Troubleshoot the learning process
> - Measure the performance of the network

> > - Visualizing Data and Results

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> - Visualizing data and results
```

### Prepare input data for use for deep learning 

This includes cleaning data, filling missing values, normalizing, and transforming categorical columns into dummy encoding.

After this module, learners can ...

- define a checklist how to analyze the raw data considering an application of ML
- describe criteria by which to judge good or bad data, e.g. how a column's values should be distributed
- execute a min-max normalization on floating point data
- sketch how to insert missing timestamps or literal values (i.e. factors or non-numeric entries)
- implement a transformation of categorical values into a numerical encoding (`int8`)
- argue for or against strategies to normalize data
- formulate techniques beyond transformations to clean data (exploit correlations, create summary statistics, ...)

### Design and train a Deep Neural Network

This includes knowledge of when to different types of layers

After this module, learners can ...

> - list/repeat the three ingrediants to a feed forward network: input, hidden layers, output
> - classify/categorize parts of a feed forward network when presented a network architecture (as from `keras.model.summary()`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- list/repeat the three ingredients to a feed forward network: input, hidden layers, output
- classify/categorize parts of a feed forward network when presented a network architecture (as from `keras.model.summary()`)
```

- interpret errors with convolutional layers
- execute a 3 layer network on the MNIST data (or similar)
- differentiate a dense layer and a convolutional layer
- experiment with values of dense layer and a convolutional layer
- select a layer type depending on the input data
- develop a 5 layer network that comprises both layer types

### Monitoring and Troubleshooting the learning process

Often when designing neural networks training will not automatically work very well. This requires setting the parameters of the training algorithm correctly, modifying the design of the network or changing the data pre-processing. After training, the performance of the network should be checked to prevent overfitting.

After this module, learners can ...

- define precision and recall/accuracy for a classification task
- state that cross-validation is used in Deep Learning too
- describe how to split a dataset into training/test/validation set
- describe how Drop-Out Layers work
- execute a plot to draw the loss per epoch for training and test set
- compare values of precision and recall
- differentiate a overfitting network from a well-behaved network

> - detect a underfitting network

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- detect when a network is underfitting or overfitting
```
